# Rachel Carson Trail Trip Report


## Discussion of This Report

- trip date: 19 November 2019
- report written: 17 February 2020

The time between the report and trip is because it never occurred to me
that I might have established the FKT for this route with my effort. This
was a very personal project, and I assumed that because of the popularity
of the official RCT Challenge my run wouldn't scratch the top 100, let
alone the top 10. However, in a recent conversation with a fellow local
runner, I realized that most people do the slightly shorter challenge
course -- and most people *do not* do the whole trail from terminus to
terminus as I did.

I do not want in anyway to demean the Challenge or anyone who as done it by
making my submission for the FKT against the whole course -- these are
simply two different things that use some of the same trail.

I have referred to my GPS data in writing this report, but mostly as a
narrative aid. The scenes I'm describing are clear as day in my mind, but I
didn't even know the names of the places that I was when they were
happening so it's awfully hard to tell the story.

My effort was unsupported. I took a sip of water from a public fountain
along the way, but that does not violate my personal ethic for
"unsupported", and the FKT FAQ supports
this. (https://fastestknowntime.com/faq) Other than that, I received no
food or water from anyone or any source other than my own pack for the
whole effort. I did not pre-stash any food, water, or gear and did not
leave any gear or litter behind. I did have a friend meet me at the end of
the trail because it's a point-to-point but I did not interact with him
physically during the effort. I also exchanged perhaps a dozen text
messages with my ride as well as my girlfriend, Vincent Zeng, who was my
designated "person who knows my plan in case something goes wrong" during
the effort, to update them on my progress. While I am grateful for their
logistical help after the effort and words of confidence, I do not believe
that constitutes "support" in the sense that would mean this isn't an
"unsupported" effort.

## Description of The Effort

### Backstory

Several years ago I decided that I'd lived in Pittsburgh long enough
without taking a shot at the Rachel Carson trail. I had graduated at the
time but was not employed, so I didn't have the money to enter the annual
official Challenge. Instead, I figured that the trail ought to be pretty
easy to follow the day *immediately after* the challenge, and there'd be
almost as much sunlight, so it ought to be nearly as good but also within
my budget. Since the Challenge would be over, I'd have to be more self
sufficient with water and food than relying on aid stations but that fit my
own ethic better anyway.

I recruited my much more experienced outdoor friend, Brian Dunlavey, and we
set off just at dawn on 22 June 2014 expecting not much trouble. We tried
to hike the whole thing, starting from the North Park Lake, and were not
prepared to run it. We threw in the towel at the intersection with Burtner
Road, unprepared to keep going into the night and out of water and food on
a hot summer's day.

After I'd forgotten enough of my first attempt, I found another partner,
Alex Hallenbeck, and tried again on 4 November 2015. I reasoned that it
would be cooler and therefore we'd need less water, but still planned to
hike the whole thing. This time we had trouble following the trail because
it wasn't as heavily used as it would be right after the challenge, and
just ran out of daylight because it was that much later in the year. As the
sun was setting we encountered some folks who were unhappy that we were
near their property, and we decided to tuck our tails and head for the
nearest PAT bus stop after about 20 miles from North Park Lake.

I toyed around with finding partners for a couple or more tries but never
that seriously. I have a lot of friends who are capable of this kind of
thing, but my own heart wasn't in it so I couldn't really hope to convince
anyone else to join me. I more or less forgot about my project for a few
years, other than leaving it on the list of unfinished and attempted things
I wasn't sure how to do and felt kind of bad about.

Last fall, though, some pieces came together and I had an unusually good
season. I ran a beautiful trail half and spent two weeks solo
backpacking. When I came back, I felt strong and confident and like I had
matured as an outdoors person -- and I remembered that the Rachel Carson
was on my nagging list. I decided that I would keep an eye on the weather
and my work schedule and see if the stars happened to align. I tried to
find a partner again, but I was confident that the experiences I'd had
since my last try meant I could do it solo without undue risk, and run it
instead of trying to hike it, and probably get through unsupported.

I was a little bit chagrined to learn that the western terminus of the
trail was now in Wexford, outside North Park, and that I'd have to run an
extra few miles to complete my end-to-end goal. I cursed myself for
delaying another attempt so that I could have done less work to still check
off my box, but decided to go for it anyway if I could.

### The Effort

The stars aligned on 19 November 2019.

The weather forecast was not perfect, but it was good enough: it was meant
to be overcast and unseasonably warm during the day, and not too cold the
night before, with a fairly low chance of rain that night. I managed to
convince my friend David Devine to be my taxi driver: my plan was to drive
myself to the western terminus in Wexford, run to the other end in
Harrision, and have David meet me there to drive me back to my car at the
start. (He's an extremely good person.)

I packed my hydration vest with 3.5L of water and about 2700 calories worth
of Clif bars, Picky bars, Hammer gels, and a few other bars I'd picked up
at REI the night before that had unusually high protein counts. I wasn't
sure what kind of nutrition I'd need, so I wanted to have enough calories
but also be able to cover my bases on nutrient balance. The two front
flasks on my vest each had 2 hydration tablets in them, and the bladder in
the back was pure water. I had an emergency bivy and extra insulating layer
in my vest, as well as a Lifesstraw and my cellphone. I wore shorts, a base
layer, a shell, my very favorite hat, gloves, and buff. I would barely end
up taking them off the next day. I also carried a pair of lightweight
trekking poles and wore trail runners.

My plan was to run as much of the trail as I could to make the most of the
daylight and to try to do it unsupported. I had some cash and a credit card
with me, so that if I was in a bad place I could buy food, water, or a ride
but only as an emergency fall back plan. I planned to only consume what I
had packed, and that's what I did with the exception of a sip of water from
a public fountain in North Park. (Following my own ethic as well as the FAQ
on the FKT website, I still feel that this is a genuine unsupported
effort. To quote the FAQ, "On the other hand, if you're walking by a public
facility that has a spigot, it seems pointless and arbitrary not to use
it. As always, just be clear about exactly what you did.")

The morning of the 19th, I woke up before my alarm went off at 4:30am,
ready to go and was out the door by 5:15am. (I'm usually more of a 10am
kind of guy.) I stopped at the McDonald's on US19 in Wexford near the
trailhead to pretend that I was going to buy a hashbrown but mostly to use
their bathroom. The folks in the restaurant looked like they were there
every morning together, hushed and clustered around a warm table sharing
stories and a meal before dawn. They noticed me and definitely weren't sure
what I was up to, but I guess I seemed harmless enough.

I parked my ancient Honda in the parking lot of Pittsburgh North Regional
Chamber of Commerce, following the directions from the RCT conservancy
website, and started looking for the beginning of the trail at 6:30am.

There's a bit of a dogleg down to the Harmony trail along Wexford
Run to find the actual sign for the western terminus so it took a second to
get oriented, especially since the sun hadn't come up and I was using my
headlamp in an unfamiliar place. I ended up following blazes for the RCT
but in the wrong direction, back to the start. I made a bad guess and
picked north instead of south on Harmony trail, jogged out a little bit
without finding the sign, then came back south past a bridge and found it
immediately. I took this hamfisted style of route planning as a good omen
for the rest of my day, and started off on the trail.

The rest of the day until sunset exists mostly as a series of vignettes in
my mind. I don't remember every footfall, but specific scenes are very
vivid to me. I've listed them here in order from West to East:

- I remember crossing US19 and thinking that I was close to my motorcycle
  mechanic, and that the next time I was waiting for an oil change I should
  bring my trail shoes and go for a run instead of sitting in the diner
  tapping my feet.

- I remember when I turned off my headlamp, nearly in North Park, and told
  myself I hoped I wouldn't have to turn it back on that day. Optimism is
  easy in the morning.

- I remember coming down through the trails in North Park near Kummer Road
  and laughing that I'd done countless workouts on the North Park loop road
  but this was my first time on the western half of the trails. And then
  remembering that my last time on the trails there at all was my last
  failed RCT attempt, and that I hadn't even made it to the old starting
  point, and my stomach dropped. I remember thinking about my friend Brian,
  and the comment he made about trying to not get lost in the white-blazed
  mounatin bike trails near the North Ridge trail in North Park.

- I remember a flock of turkeys sitting on the trail -- maybe about 30 of
  them. I've had some bad luck with turkeys before, because they can get
  pretty aggressive when they're disturbed. I made the loudest "woop woop!"
  noises I could from far up the trail, and they begrudgingly shuffled off
  to one side so I could pass unpecked.

- I crossed the railroad tracks near Pine Creek and was surprised to see
  them already. I was starting to lose track of time and get landmarks out
  of order, and it seemed awfully early in the day for that. A little bit
  before that I had realized that all the water I'd be crossing was going
  to be very cold, and that my day would quickly end if I messed up and
  fell into any of it. I looked down at my watch and was shocked to see
  that I'd run 10 miles already; as a road runner I usually feel every
  tenth, but I barely noticed it.

- Shortly after the segment on Sample road, there was a stream crossing to
  a muddy flat part of the trail that I remembered from my previous
  attempts. The water this time was much higher, with some runoff skimming
  the surface, and being alone on a comparatively cold day I didn't want to
  get wet at all. I saw a tree laying over the creek about 20 yards up
  stream from the crossing and shimmied across that instead. A fair amount
  of profanity was involved, because this manoeuvre was pretty tenuous and
  I suddenly felt awfully alone; luckily the deer didn't seem to mind my
  bad language. Much of the trail on the muddy flat was washed out and
  indistinct, so I followed it as best I could and was glad to be past it.

- I remember turning onto the flat dirt road at Church Lane and finally
  being able to open up my stride for a little while. I tucked my poles
  under my arm and ran as much like a real runner as I could; it felt very
  good and I think I clocked something like 9 minute mile.

- I remember specifically eating one of the new-to-me protein rich bars I
  bought as I crossed over I76 on the PA910 bridge and choking it down
  somewhat, cursing myself for trying new things on "race day". I like that
  bridge a lot; PA910 is a nice motorcycle riding road, so I've been there
  many times, and it was nice to feel something familiar.

- I saw the first and I think only other person I would see that day in
  Emmerling park, just after the Harlequins Rugby stadium. He was in waders
  in Deek Creek and waved to say hello. I waved back, used my voice for the
  first time that day, and wondered if he had any real idea of what I was
  trying to do or how deep in my own head I had been before he greeted
  me. It was good to remember other people.

- I remember the ascent and then desecent into Agan Park. The first time I
  tried the RCT, V had stashed myself and Brian some water and clean socks
  behind a big tree there, and it was full of families playing catch. This
  time it was closed for the season and awfully lonely -- but I felt good
  that I was at my previous cache site with more than half the water I
  started with. The road segment up hill after Agan was as much fun as
  always; there was some more foul language about cars, speed limits, and
  visibility, but again luckily no one was round to mind much.

- Things got hard for me in the Park-n-Ride for PA28 at the bottom of Ridge
  Road. It was shortly before sunset and I had promised both my ride,
  David, and V that I would check in by sunset but probably not before. I
  stopped and pulled out my phone for the first time, read the chatter
  between them during the day, and let them know where I was. They were
  both very excited and told me to go for it, and that I was within 10
  miles from the finish. I had been managing something like 4 mph to that
  point, so that seemed to me like something I could do -- "just two more
  hours, ish" in fuzzy end of day math. David set out from the city to meet
  me, and I shuffled off up Ridge Road into the gathering gloom. I put on
  my headlamp for the first time since that morning and noticed that there
  was a fog bordering on turning into rain.

- The hardest part of the whole day was the next road crossing, with
  Burtner Road just west of PA28. That was my previous "high point" with
  Brian on my first attempt. It's hard to go past your previous best;
  there's a real resistance, because it means you're doing something you've
  never done before, and that brings possibilities for new failures at the
  same time as you're thinking about how badly the last one stung. I stood
  at the bottom of the climb going east for a good long time, turned off my
  headlamp, and let it rain on me so I could think clearly about what I was
  about to do. Then I turned my headlamp back on and did it.

- Once I crossed under PA28 for the last time I knew I was basically
  done. I had to not get lost and execute the last part but the weight was
  off my shoulders. I stopped along Veterans Lane near Freeport Road, near
  the entrance of Harrison Hills park, to text David again and let him know
  I was still on to finish even though I was way later than he would have
  extrapolated. My pace slowed dramatically after the sunset because the
  beam of my headlamp was reflecting off the fog and light rain in the
  atmosphere; I made the decision to take it slow and go blaze-to-blaze so
  that I wouldn't get lost rather than trying to burn it out and ending up
  causing more trouble for myself.

- I got turned around in Harrison Hills Park for the first time all day,
  and ended up doing some route finding both around the pond in the south
  and cellphone tower in the north. In both cases, I believe I followed the
  appropriate blazes the whole time but that the trail may fork or become
  vague in popular high traffic areas. The maps posted in the park, on the
  Conservancy website, and various maps on the internet also do not quite
  agree about these areas, which supports my guess about forking makes me
  suspect that I am not the only person who has been confused here.

- The last mile or two up the side of Harrison Hills overlooking the river
  felt it went on forever. The rain was picking up, making the view into
  Freeport and Garvers Ferry indistinct. I'd hiked that segment before but
  it felt so much longer than I remembered.

- When I came past the tower and onto the gravel road, I gave it my best
  effort to trot home to the finish in good style. God only knows how I
  actually looked. When I got to the parking lot under the billboard that
  is the Eastern Terminus, thankfully, no one was there. David had gone to
  get dinner because I had slowed down so much, and in doing so gave me the
  extremely rare gift of clicking "stop" and "save" on my watch with no
  fanfare and no one but myself to think about what I'd just done.

- And then he arrived and I sank gratefully into the heated seats of his
  car, apologized for how I smelled, and he started the drive back to my
  car, a shower, and bed.

When I returned home to unpack my gear and have dinner, I was shocked to
find I had about 1L of water left. Because of the cool temperatures, light
rain, and overcast skies, I drank both flasks of electrolyte fortified
water and only some of the bladder so I had a ton left over. I also
basically didn't touch my gels -- a real staple for me during road racing,
but the one I tried absolutely turned my stomach. I had two clif bars left
which I happily ate on the drive.

### Afterwards

I was surprised at how fine I felt in the days after this effort. I took a
week off running and then got back into it, and just moved along with my
life.

Even though this was a very personal activity for me, its importance was
more in doing it than having done it. I have complicated feelings about the
trail itself -- between some of the encounters with local land owners I've
had, the erosion problems that the Conservancy is always fighting against,
and the irony of the damage done to the land around the trail in comparison
to the ideals of its namesake. I'm not positive that my presence on the
trails the three times I've been on it was a net positive thing.

I am grateful to the people that I know who unintentionally helped me
become the person I needed to be to do this. Not everyone is as lucky as I
am to have friends who care so much.
